The painting is made by La’l and Babu Naqqash around 1590 to show Akbar and his army fighting in the battle of Sarnal against Ibrahim Husain Mirza and his army
Akbar is a well-established leader, who is able to conquer mostly all of northern India with the help of his well-kept Mughal army.
The state of Gujarat had mostly been conquered by Akbar but the Mirza’s who are enemies of Akbar were trying to take it back right under his nose
Upon hearing that Ibrahim Husain Mirza is in Sarnal, Akbar leads his troops on a conquest to find and kill the Mirza’s once and for all.
It is said in the Akbarnama that Ibrahim Husain Mirza said that he saw the dust of the victorious army, which means he knew that Akbar was coming for him.
This scene, shows a powerful Akbar in the center leading his Mughal army into battle.
Dressed in armour from head to toe and the only one wearing a feather on his helmet and a gold extension from the helmet to protect his neck
Akbar also rides a white horse that is also covered in armour
When given the news of Ibrahim Husain Mirza being in Sarnal, Akbar who sent most of his troops to fight in other cities
had only 200 troops to take with against just around 1000 troops of the Mirza army.
Akbar’s troops were also well covered in armour along with their horses
These mercenaries are also hand-picked and paid well to fight hence all the success Akbar has had due to these troops
Akbar and the troops also hold spears which give them a reach advantage over the enemy and are light enough to move around quickly,
with archers in the back to support.
This scene, shows the terrain that battle was taken place on and how it played an important role in Akbar winning this fight
Sarnal falls in the desert area in the state of Gujarat
This desert is very hilly and full of cacti
The mahi river is also seen flowing on one side of the battlefield
Beyond the Mahi river are larger hills with some having flourishing trees and others with dead trees.
People are also painted in black shadows in the distance on these larger hills looking like they are working
In the very left corner a fortress can be seen
In Gujarat, these fortresses were strongholds and those that controlled them usually were the ones that ruled that area
With this terrain being hard to work with and it also being very narrow,
Akbar and his small army were able to move around a lot easier than the larger Mirza army leading to Akbar’s victory
This scene, shows one of Akbar’s troops piercing one of the troops from the Mirza army
with his spear that gave him the reach advantage over the sword in the enemy's hand
There are also troops seen heading in front of Akbar which shows that they must protect their ruler while he fights with them.
The cacti are also seen in great bunches throughout this part of the painting
Some troop members are also carry swords but have a shield as well for extra protection
Akbar and his army are able to fight off the Mirza army as seen
and win the battle of Sarnal which leads to the conquer of the rest of Gujarat.